\section{Summary of proposed exchange activities}
A partnership and scientific exchange programme is proposed between the 
University of S\~{a}o Paulo (USP) and the University of Warwick (UoW). The USP 
partner is the Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science (ICMC). The UoW 
partners are the Centre for Complexity Science (CCS) and the Zeeman Institute 
for Systems Biology and Infectious Disease Epidemiology Research (SBIDER), two  
interdisciplinary joint ventures of the Warwick Mathematics Institute. The USP 
project leader is Prof. Francisco A. Rodrigues, an associate professor and head 
of the Complex Systems group at the ICMC. The UoW project leader is Dr. Colm 
Connaughton, a reader in applied mathematics and director of the CCS. The 
scientific theme  of the proposed partnership is dynamical processes on 
multi-layer and dynamic networks. It relates to the FAPESP grant "Information 
spreading in complex networks" (2016/25682-5) currently held by Prof. Rodrigues 
at the ICMC. The high level aims of the proposed exchange are:
\begin{itemize}
\item to improve scientific understanding of the dynamics of coherent phenomena 
in dynamical and multilayer networks.
\item to forge a new, durable and mutually beneficial scientific collaboration 
between existing strong complex systems research groups at UoW and USP.
\end{itemize}
A detailed description of the scientific objectives of the collaboration is 
provided in Sec.~\ref{sec-science}. The proposed exchange programme will run 
for two years spanning the 2017-18 and 2018-19 academic years. The first year 
will see visits to UoW by members of the USP team and the second year will see 
return visits to USP by members of the UoW team. A detailed description of the 
proposed schedule is provided in Sec.~\ref{sec-timeline}. In parallel to this 
proposal, Connaughton and Rodrigues have jointly prepared a complementary 
proposal to be submitted to the Leverhulme Trust (deadline 11 May 2017) seeking 
a Leverhulme Visiting Professorship to be held by Prof. Rodrigues at UoW for 
the 2017-18 academic year. If funded, this complementary proposal will allow us 
to significantly enhance both the breadth and depth of the proposed partnership.

\section{Description of research team}

\subsection{Partner institutions}
The {\hvnb Centre for Complexity Science (CCS)} at the UoW was founded in 2007 
to host one of the first EPSRC Centres for Doctoral Training (CDT) on the topic 
of complex systems. It grew rapidly to become one of the largest complexity 
science research groups in the UK. It currently hosts 8 academic staff, several 
postdoctoral researchers and about 50 graduate students. It co-hosts the 
\pounds 3.4M EPSRC-MRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Mathematics of Real 
World Systems in partnership with SBIDER. The {\hvnb Zeeman Institute for 
Systems Biology and Infectious Disease Epidemiology Research (SBIDER)} was 
established in 2016 when the Warwick Systems Biology Centre and Warwick 
Infectious Disease and Epidemiology Research Centre joined forces to form one 
of the largest mathematical biology research groups in the UK. In addition to 
partnering with the CCS in the MathSys CDT it is the coordinating node of a 
\$10M global consortium funded by the Gates Foundation to develop the modelling 
capability to support the UN 2020 goals for the elimination of Neglected 
Tropical Diseases. Both the CCS and SBIDER are interdisciplinary joint ventures 
of the {\hvnb Warwick Mathematics Institute (WMI)} which provides physical 
space and administrative support. WMI ranked 3rd in the UK for mathematical 
sciences in the 2014 Research Excellence Framework (the most recent UK national 
research assessment exercise) and 32nd globally in the 2016 QS world university 
subject rankings. In 2014, Regius Professor Martin Hairer was awarded a fields 
medal. UoW is therefore ideally placed to participate in and benefit from 
international partnerships with distinguished researchers like Prof. Rodrigues. 
{\hvnb  Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science (ICMC), USP}\\
{\color{red} Need a few lines from Francisco about ICMC}

\subsection{University of S\~{a}o Paolo Team}
\begin{itemize}
\item {\hvnb Prof. Francisco A. Rodrigues (USP team leader)} is an associate 
professor at the Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science (ICMC), 
University of S\~{a}o Paulo. He holds a degree in Physics (2001, B.A. degree) 
and a masters degree in Computational Physics (2004), both from University of 
S\~{a}o Paulo. In 2007, he got his PhD in Physics from Physics Institute of 
S\~{a}o Carlos (University of S\~{a}o Paulo). After that, he was a 
post-doctoral researcher at the same institute with FAPESP fellowship 
(2007-2010). In the beginning of 2010, he got a tenure-track position at the 
ICMC as a lecturer and researcher. He became associate professor on the end of 
2013. Francisco has published more than 60 papers in scientific journals, 
receiving more than 2,500 citations (Google scholar). He concluded the 
supervision of three masters students and advised several undergraduate 
students. Currently, he supervises five PhD students and six masters students. 
His teaching activities in graduate and undergraduate courses are related to 
the fields of Statistics, Probability, Stochastic Processes and Network 
Science. He also coordinated several research projects (including international 
projects).
Currently, he is the president of the research committee at the ICMC and the 
head of the Complex Systems group.

\item {\hvnb Prof. Luciano da Fontoura Costa} is a full professor at the Institute of Physics at São Carlos. He holds a degree in Electrical Engineering and a PhD in Physics (Kings College London). He published more than 280 papers in scientific journal, receiving more than 11,000 citations (h-index 45) (Google Scholar). He advised more than 50 graduate students and coordinated several research projects, including international projects like Human Frontiers. He is an expert in complex networks, image analysis, electronics and data mining.

\item {\hvnb Mr. Thomas Kau\^{e} Dal Maso Peron}  is a PhD student advised by prof. Rodrigues.  He holds a degree in Physics (2010) and a MS degree in computational physics. He published more than 20 papers in scientific journals, including a paper on the high impact factor journal Physics Reports. He will finish his PhD course in the second semester of 2017. FAPESP has already approved his post-doctoral  fellowship to start this year. He is an expert in synchronization of coupled oscillators.

\item {\hvnb Mr. Guilherme Ferraz de Arruda } holds a degree in Electrical Engineering and MS degree in Computer Science. He is finishing the PhD course under the supervision of prof. Rodrigues. He published more than 10 papers in scientific journals.
\end{itemize}

\subsection{University of Warwick Team}
\begin{itemize}
\item
{\hvnb Dr. Colm Connaughton (UoW team leader)}  is a Reader in the Warwick 
Mathematics Institute, the director of the Warwick Centre for Complexity 
Science and the deputy director of the EPSRC-MRC funded Mathematical of Real 
World Systems (MathSys) Centre for Doctoral Training. He is an expert on 
complex systems, fluid dynamics and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics with 
particular expertise on turbulence and the kinetic theory of irreversible 
systems. He has published 51 papers in international peer-reviewed journals and 
is responsible, as PI or CI, for over \pounds 11M of current or previous EPSRC 
CDT support, including the MathSys CDT, plus over \pounds 350K of direct 
research support from various agencies. 
\item {\hvnb Prof. Matt Keeling:} is a Professor of mathematical epidemiology 
at the University of Warwick with a joint appointment between the Mathematics 
Institute and the School of Life Sciences. His research focuses on the 
development and application of mathematical models of infectious disease 
propagation in human and animal populations.  He has authored over 100 papers 
which have garnered over 11000 citations (Google Scholar). He is currently the 
director of the Zeeman Institute for Systems Biology and Infectious Disease 
Epidemiology (SBIDER).
\item {\hvnb Prof. Robert MacKay FRS FInstP FIMA:} is the Professor of 
Interdisciplinary Mathematics at the Warwick Mathematics Institute, a fellow of 
the Royal Society and former president of the Institute of Mathematics and its 
Applications. He is the former director of the Centre for Complexity Science 
and founding director of the MathSys CDT. He is an expert in dynamical systems, 
mathematical physics and complexity science. He is particularly well known for 
his fundamental contribution to the mathematical theory of synchronisation and 
coherent structures in spatially extended nonlinear systems.   He has authored 
1 book, 136 peer-reviewed journal articles and 50 other articles, and entered 
the ISI Highly cited list under Mathematics in 2008.
\item{\hvnb Dr. Samuel Johnson} is an assistant professor in the WMI and CCS.  
He is an expert in networks and theoretical ecology.
\item{\hvnb Dr. Louise Dyson} is an assistant professor in the WMI and SBIDER.  
Her expertise is in social complexity and mathematical epidemiology.
\item{\hvnb Dr. Emre Esenturk} is a Marie Curie postdoctoral fellow in the WMI 
and CCS. He is an expert in kinetic theory.
\item{\hvnb Dr. Lorenzo Pellis} is a Henry Dale postdoctoral fellow in the WMI 
and SBIDER. His field of expertise is mathematical epidemiology.
\end{itemize}

\section{Scientific objectives}
\label{sec-science}
\subsection{Background and scientific context}
Complex systems are composed of connected elements whose interactions are 
nonlinear~\cite{BarYam97,Mitchell09}. Examples of complex systems include our 
society, the Internet, our brain and cellular interactions~\cite{Mitchell09}. 
The modelling of complex system behaviour has attracted the attention of 
researchers from several areas, including Mathematics, Physics, Biology, 
Computer Science and Engineering. Indeed, the study of these systems has 
several applications in Science and Technology, including the control of 
disease spreading~\cite{Pastor015} and adjustment of synchronization in data 
transmission~\cite{Pikovsky03}. Since the last century, researchers have 
verified that the structure of several complex systems are characterized by a 
very heterogeneous organization, presenting a special set of highly connected 
elements, whereas the remainder of the components are low 
connected~\cite{Barabasi99}. This ubiquitous scale-free architecture is 
observed in numerous systems, from food webs to collaboration networks of 
scientists~\cite{Costa011}, and has important implication to system dynamics. 
For instance, previous works verified that the epidemic threshold for disease 
propagation depends on the level of network heterogeneity, being close to zero 
in a scale-free network~\cite{Pastor015}. Thus, these networks are the ideal 
medium for disease transmission, explaining the quick propagation of viruses in 
our society, like those that can cause influenza~\cite{Keeling08}. Moreover, 
the network organization influences the emergence of synchronization in systems 
like power grids and our brain~\cite{Arenas08}. In this case, a set of 
self-sustained oscillators interacts and after a given critical coupling 
strength, a collective behaviour emerges. Other dynamical processes, including 
cascade failures, percolation and voter models, also depend on the network 
structure~\cite{Barrat08}. 

Although the study of dynamical processes on complex networks provided 
important results to understand the structure and behaviour of complex systems, 
most of these works considered static networks composed by only one type of 
interaction~\cite{Costa011, Barabasi016}. However, most of natural and 
artificial systems evolve with time, changing contacts due to numerous factors. 
For instance, people move from home to workplaces everyday and their contacts 
change throughout the day. Moreover, groups of animals move to form complex 
dynamical patterns across a broad range of length scales, like flock of birds. 
These systems are better modelled as dynamical agents moving in a surface, 
defining networks whose structure changes with time~\cite{Buscarino08, 
Levis017}.  Additionally, real world systems present more than one type of 
interaction. For instance, in cities, people can move on the streets or by 
subways, defining different means of transport.  Multilayer networks can 
represent these multiple channels of connections, where each layer defines one 
type of interaction~\cite{Kivela014, Boccaletti014}. 

The study of complex systems by moving agents~\cite{Levis017} and multilayer 
networks~\cite{Kivela014} is very recent and there are several issues to be 
addressed, as we propose in this project. Particularly, we aim at developing a 
new model of synchronization of traveling agents, considering different types 
of interaction and rough landscapes for particles moving. We will be able to 
determine conditions for phase transition and the influence of parameters 
related to the dynamics of agents on the emergence of the collective behaviour. 
Epidemic and rumour spreading will also be analysed on the context of traveling 
particles to determine how different properties, such as velocity and roughness 
of the landscape, influence the propagation. Regarding multilayer networks, we 
will analyse how the propagation of awareness in a layer affects the disease 
transmission in the other layer. With this study, we will be able to develop 
methods for epidemic control based on dissemination of rumours about the 
pathogen. The research proposed in this project will enable to start the 
collaboration between the Centre for Complexity Science at the University of 
Warwick and the Complex Systems Group at the University of S\~{a}o Paulo. This 
collaboration will include several researchers and graduate students from both 
sides.

{\color{red} Need to add other members of USP team to these objectives based on 
expertise}

\subsection{Objective 1:  Synchronisation of moving agents (Rodrigues, MacKay, 
Connaughton, Johnson, Esenturk)}
Synchronization occurs when a set of self-sustained oscillators are weakly 
connected as a network, whose structure influences the emergence of the 
synchronous state. In the case of Kuramoto oscillators, the critical coupling 
strength for the emergence of synchronization depends inversely on the second 
moment of the degree distribution. Chaotic oscillators, including those 
proposed by R\"{o}ssler and Lorentz, can also synchronize when linked as a 
network~\cite{Arenas08}. Most of the studies on synchronization of coupled 
oscillators have considered static networks. However, recently, researchers 
considered oscillators interacting in a dynamic network. In this case, 
oscillators move in a two-dimensional space and interact inside a fixed radius. 
The initial works on this topic considered oscillators as interacting mobile 
agents~\cite{Levis017} in a two-dimensional space. Our goal is to generalize 
this study by considering non-flat surfaces. That is, we aim at implementing a 
model of particles moving in a rough relief whose velocities change according 
to their positions. Each agent is a Kuramoto oscillator and the interaction 
between pairs of oscillators occurs according to their distance. This analysis 
will enable to verify how such terrain affects the emergence of the synchronous 
state. This model generalizes previous works and combines the experience of 
prof. Francisco with synchronization and the expertise of prof. Colm with mass 
transport models. This work will also be developed with collaboration of prof. 
Robert Mackay, who works with rigorous mathematical formalism, which may be 
necessary for a theoretical formulation of the system dynamics. Prof. Samuel 
Johnson will also participate on this analysis, since he has experience on 
complex networks theory and modelling of complex systems.

\subsection{Objective 2: Epidemic spreading in complex networks (Rodrigues, 
Keeling, Dyson, Pellis)}

Epidemic processes are ubiquitous in nature, society and 
technology~\cite{Pastor015}. The theoretical study of information propagation 
has several applications, from disease control and forecasting to rumour 
spreading analysis~\cite{Barrat08, Pastor015}. Prof. Francisco has been working 
with epidemic models in networks for five years (e.g.~\cite{Arruda014, 
Arruda017}) and the collaboration with researchers from Warwick, mainly 
professors Lorenzo Pellis, Louise Dyson and Matt Keeling, will complement 
several studies on computational epidemiology. The main idea is to develop 
epidemic models on systems composed of moving agents or represented as 
multilayer networks. In the former case, subjects travel in a two-dimensional 
space and interact when their distance is smaller than a given threshold. This 
modelling approach was considered before~\cite{Frasca06, Buscarino08}, but the 
initial models are very simple and do not include important aspects of epidemic 
dynamics, such as heterogeneous transmission and agents moving with different 
velocities. Our goal is to simulate several epidemic models, like 
susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR), on different scenarios of agent mobility. 
Theoretical analysis to obtain analytical solutions of the dynamical processes, 
such as the epidemic threshold, will also be addressed during the visit of 
prof. Francisco to Warwick. In the case of multilayer representation, we will 
consider networks composed by two types of interactions. In one layer, 
information about a disease is shared among users, like in a social network. 
This information affects the transmission of the disease on the other layer, 
where the pathogen travels. Our goal is to generalize previous works on this 
topic~\cite{Funk09, Granell013} and use more suitable models for information 
transmission, like the one introduced by Maki and Thompson~\cite{Moreno04}. 
Thus, we will be able to verify how epidemics can be controlled by the 
propagation of awareness. 
These works will be developed in collaboration between prof. Francisco 
Rodrigues and prof. Matt Keeling, Lorenzo Pellis and Louise Dyson, who study 
epidemic models. 


\subsection{Objective 3: Network methods for analysis of turbulence (Rodrigues, 
Connaughton)}
Time series analysis is a central topic in several research areas, including 
physics, biology, medicine and economics. Recently, several methods have been 
developed to transform time series into networks (e.g.~\cite{Lacasa08, 
Marwan09, Donner010}). This approach has been used to find patterns of activity 
in dynamical systems. For instance, the use of recurrence network analysis to 
model paleoclimatic data enabled to identify transition periods related to 
human evolution~\cite{Donges011}. 

There are several methods to transform time series into 
networks~\cite{Lacasa08, Marwan09} and there is no consensus about what is the 
most appropriate one for a given application. In case of turbulence, it is 
possible to extract time series whose patterns determines different regimes. 
Our goal is to compare methods to transform time series into complex networks 
and verify which one is the most suitable to find turbulent regimes. In 
addition, we aim at determining how properties of turbulent flow are related to 
network topology. That is, we will verify how flow regimes in fluid dynamics 
are associated to network topology. For instance, whether the increase in 
network heterogeneity is related to chaotic behaviour. This study will provide 
a new approach to study turbulence dynamics and open a new area of research. 
This research will be performed in collaboration between prof. Colm Connaughton 
and prof. Francisco Rodrigues.

\subsection{Relationship to ongoing FAPESP grant}
{\color{red} Need to write something sensible here}
Fapesp grant: Information spreading in complex networks
Process: 2016/25682-5

Epidemic spreading can follow different routes, which can be mapped as layers 
in social networks. A great challenge in computational epidemics todays is to 
determine how the structure of the network influences the propagation. In this 
project, we aim at applying statistical inference methods for quantification of 
which network properties most influence the propagation of disease and rumors. 
In addition, we will model the social organization as made up by several 
layers. Finally, we will study how awareness influences the propagation of an 
infectious agent. These studies will contribute for developing new methods for 
epidemic forecasting and control.

\section{Management, timeline and and expected outputs}
\label{sec-timeline}
\subsection{Management and scientific schedule}
The project will be managed jointly by Connaughton and Rodrigues following the 
rules and procedures of their respective institutions. All the projects propose 
here will be developed in parallel, since we have researchers interested in 
different fields. As following, we provide a description of the activities and 
the respective expected period.

\begin{itemize}
\item {\hvnb Synchronization of moving agents:} Initially, the project will 
start with some simulations of synchronization in a two dimensional flat space. 
The group from USP will perform the software implementation with help of 
researchers from Warwick. It is expected that this step will take about three 
months and the first results will be discussed after this time period. It is 
expected the whole analysis of this part of the project will take about 12 
months.

\item {\hvnb Network methods for analysis of turbulence:} This part of the 
project will take about 18 months. We will implement several algorithms to 
transform time series into networks. After that, we will validate the 
implementations considering time series of several dynamical processes, 
including chaotic, random and periodic signals. Next, the group from Warwick 
will generate data related to turbulence. Then, we will compare the methods in 
order to verify which one is the most suitable to capture properties of 
turbulent flow.

\item {\hvnb Epidemic spreading in complex networks:} The analysis of epidemic 
processes in networks will take about 18 months. Initially, we will adapt the 
models developed by the Warwick group to multilayer and temporal networks. 
Next, we will generalize disease transmission models to temporal networks made 
up of moving agents. Both groups will perform the implementation of the models.
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Schedule of exchange visits}

To develop the research proposed in this project, several meetings are 
necessary to discuss the results and further research steps. Thus, basically, 
we plan to have the following visits:
\begin{itemize}
\item From Warwick to USP:
\begin{itemize}
\item Prof. Colm  and Emre Esenturk will visit the group in S\~{a}o Carlos in 
the first semester of 2018 and stay there for about two weeks. Prof. Colm will 
visit the group again in 2019.
\item Samuel Johnson will visit the group at USP in the second semester 2018 
for about 10 days.
\item Lorenzo Pellis and Louise Dyson will visit the group in S\~{a}o Carlos in 
the first and second semesters of 2019. Their visits will take about two weeks.
\end{itemize}

\item From USP to Warwick:
\begin{itemize}
\item Prof. Francisco will visit the group in Warwick in the second semester of 
2018 and second semester of 2019.
\item Thomas Peron will visit the group in Warwick in the first semester of 
2018 and second semester of 2019.
\item Guilherme Arruda will visit the group in Warwick in the second semester 
of 2018.
\item Paulo Ventura will visit the group in Warwick in the first semester of 
2019. The visit of these students will take about two weeks.
\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

{\color{red}We probably need to mention that there would be two possible 
schedules of visits depending on whether we get the Leverhulme grant or not.}
\subsection{Expected outputs}
The following concrete and quantifiable outputs are expected to result from 
this partnership:
\begin{itemize}
\item Scientific publications: collaborative work on the scientific objectives 
described above will lead to joint publications in high-impact international 
journals.
\item Workshop: Connaughton and Rodrigues hope to co-organise a 2-3 day 
international workshop on "Dynamics of spatial networks" to coincide with one 
of Prof. Rodrigues' UK visits. The topic is proposed in response to a recent 
call for workshop topics from the EPSRC-funded network on Emergence and Physics 
Far From Equilibrium, of which Connaughton and MacKay are both members. This 
would allow us to organise an event of international significance at no 
additional cost to the grant.
\item Joint training of PhD students: PhD students from Warwick's Complexity 
Science and MathSys CDTs and from USP will also participate in the research 
described above and enjoy the opprtunity to make exchange visits between USP 
and UoW.
\item Engagement with wider UK and Brazilian research communities: on the UK 
side, Prof. Rodrigues will have the opportunity to make seminar visits to 
complexity science groups at other UK institutions (Manchester, Imperial, 
Cambridge, Oxford, Bristol, QMUL)  to be organised with local seminar 
organisers.
\item Lectures:  if the Leverhulme application is successful, Prof. Rodrigues 
will teach an advanced graduate level course (the Leverhulme Lectures) at UoW 
consisting of 8 2-hour lectures aimed at graduate students in the Complexity 
Science and MathSys CDTs. The topic would be "Theory of Networks". They will be 
delivered via the Mathematics Taught Course Centre (TCC), a joint venture 
between the maths departments at Bath, Bristol, Imperial, Oxford and Warwick. 
It uses video-conferencing facilities to organise a series of postgraduate 
courses each year that can be taken by graduate students at all 5 TCC partners.
\end{itemize}

\section{Impacts of exchange for host and partner institutions}
In signing the SPRINT partnership agreement, both UoW and USP have recognised 
the growing strategic importance of closer scientific relationships between the 
UK and Brazil.
From the perspective of WMI, this partnership has the potential to  contribute 
deeply to the research activities of the CCS and SBIDER. The specialist value 
that Prof. Rodrigues will bring is his ability to link the more theoretical 
complexity science and dynamical systems research at Warwick (MacKay, Johnson, 
Esenturk) with the more applied research being done in epidemiological 
modelling (Keeling, Pellis, Dyson) and industrial mathematics (Connaughton). At 
the UK national level, such expertise is particularly important at this point 
in time as RCUK and the industrial community are increasingly moving towards 
the view that the significant investments made in complex systems research over 
the last ten years, including at Warwick, should now be maturing to produce 
real world applications.  The choice of ICMC as a SPRINT partner is therefore 
strongly aligned both with local research priorities at UoW and with wider 
national research priorities. The potential benefits will be realised through 
the outputs mentioned above

From the ICMC side, the collaboration with the researchers from UoW will be very important to 
reinforce some research areas, including epidemic modelling, analysis of time series and 
synchronization. Particularly, researchers at ICMC have experience with mathematical modelling 
of disease propagation, but will benefit greatly from the analysis of real world data and more realistic
models studied in UoW, mainly by the group of prof. Keeling. In the case of analysis of time series in 
terms of complex networks, an important problem is the study of turbulent flow,  Dr. Connaughton is an 
expert in simulation of flow dynamics and will provide the knowledge necessary to adapt the current 
methods for time series transformation to study turbulent behaviour. Finally, the study of 
synchronization by researchers from ICMC will be improved with the theoretical background provided 
by prof. MacKay. The contact with the scientific environment in UoW and the multidisciplinary studies 
will also be very important for the ICMC research team, improving their scientific experience.



